Transforming lives through
renewable energy access in Africa
UNDP’s Contributions
UNDP Regional Bureau for Africa (RBA)
UNDP Africa Policy Brief Vol. 1, No. 1, May 2018
Global irradiance: Africa’s great solar energy potential
May 2018
© UNDP Regional Bureau for Africa
The policy brief was approved for distribution by Tegegnework Gettu, OIC and Associate Administrator.
The preparation of this policy brief was led by Ayodele Odusola, UNDP Africa Chief Economist. Much
appreciation goes to Noura Hamladji, RBA Deputy Director, for initiating the thematic focus of this
knowledge product. Special thanks goes to Frederick Mugisha (Economic Advisor, UNDP South Sudan),
Marcel Alers (Head of Energy, BPPS) and James Neuhaus for design and production logistics. Inputs from
colleagues listed from countries in Annex 1 are also acknowledged.
Photo credits
Cover Solargis s.r.o
Pg. 3 Renewable Energy News In Africa
Pg. 7 AbSugar
Pg. 10 USAID / Power Africa
Pg. 13 Azuri Technologies
Pg. 14 IIP Photo Archive
Pg. 15 Tropical Power
Acknowledgments
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 Infograph: Transforming lives through renewable energy in Africa ii
 Infograph: How UNDP is using renewable energy to achieve the SDGs in Africa iii
1. Context: Energy Access in Africa 1
2. Africa’s Renewable Energy Potential 3
3. UNDP’s Life-Transforming Engagements and Emerging Opportunities 7
4. Lessons Learned 17
5. Conclusions and Opportunities for Renewable Energy Partnerships 19
 References 25
LIST OF ANNEXES
Annex 1. Summary of UNDP partnerships on renewable energy in Africa 21
LIST OF BOXES
Box 1 : UNDP’s efforts to help resolve the renewable energy
 paradox in Nigeria 6
Box 2: UNDP’s efforts to promote access to renewable energy in Ghana 9
Box 3: Renewable energy opportunities in Chad and Madagascar 12
Box 4: Solar lights up new hope for the remote
 Nyatsato Primary School, Zimbabwe 13
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Access to energy in Africa, 1990-2012 (%) 2
Figure 2. Resources mobilized for Africa through UNDP-GEF partnership 5
Figure 3. Cumulative installed solar energy capacity 11
Figure 4. Potential PV electricity output 11
Figure 5. Wind power density potential 14
Figure 6. Global cumulative installed wind turbine capacity, 2016 (%) 15
Figure 7. African countries’ wind energy installed capacity (MW) 16
LIST OF MAPS
Map 1. Access to electricity in Africa is very low 1
Map 2. Renewable energy power plants in South Africa 3
Transforming lives through
renewable energy access in Africa
Annual average surface
solar irradiance:
Germany
Africa
13.7%
0.8%
Global Horizontal Solar radiation
Africa’s Great Solar Potential
Africa’s Biomass Potential Africa’s Wind Energy Potential
125W/m2
260W/m2
Germany
Africa
Global share of
solar installed capacity
UNDP Africa
solar power pilot programmes include
· solar irrigation
· solar lamps
· solar kits · solar pumping
· solar streetlights · solar centres · guaranteed funds
· GEF small grants
Four of ten Africans
have access to electricity compared to about
nine of ten people globally
Unless something urgent is done
sub-Saharan Africa accounts for
of theglobal deficit of electricity access translating
to 609 million Africans without electricity
57%
an
additional
UNDP Africa’s
measures to
promote
renewable energy
access include
· quality standards
· knowledge transfer
· infrastructure
· rolling out renewable energy
products and services
· Promoting technology transfer
added to the deficit
by 2030
45 million
Africans
may
be
advocacy
regulatory
policy
technical
financial
UNDP is catalytic
in helping countries with
Stimulating universal access to renewable energy
is essential to human and economic development, and catalytic to
achieving all SDGs in Africa,
yet renewable energy in Africa remains virtually untapped
UNDP’s role and mandate to support access to energy in Africa is clear
 to meet the Agenda 2030 Goals, strong policy and
partnership efforts must be implemented urgently.
bioenergy
woodlots
communitybased
forest
management
bio-gas and
bio-coal
briquette
technology
Africa’s global share of the installed wind turbine capacity is very low, at 0.8 per cent
UNDP is deploying biomass gasifiers in a mini-grid
project in Benin in combination with sustainable
forest management practices
Yet, the average wind speed in Africa is 6.47 m/s,
surpassing the minimum (6 m/s) for constructing
utility-scale wind power plants
 UNDP’s interventions transformed at least 3,472 communities
– reaching at least 3.35 million Africans
in 2014
ii
5
How UNDP is UsiNg reNewable eNergy to acHieve
tHe sDgs iN africa
• Solar water heating system Kenya • Solar-powered borehole pumps Nigeria
Supported over 150 clean energy initiatives in biomass, solar, and wind
technologies, and increasing energy efficiency
Providing clean water and managing
waste
Supported 22 micro, small, and medium
enterprise initiatives, including
• Training 25,000 people on solar cooker
technlogies in Chad
• Supporting business incubation
benefitting 1,038 entrepreneurs in
Ethiopia
• Generating over 60,000 jobs through
renewable energy IPP in South Africa
Reduces gaps between rural and urban
communities:
• Installing solar kits in 211,950
households in rural Ethiopia
 • Providing energy services to 7 villages in
Central African Republic and
41 municipalities in Benin
• Providing energy services to 41
municipalities in Benin
• Installing bio digesters in 44
communities, benefitting 1,548
people in Guinea
• Changing from diesel to biogas in
five villages in Niger
Supporting biomass initiatives,
solar-powered agriculture, and
agro industries across 23 African
countries reduces food and
agriculture wastages
Clean energy sources create
far less water pollution than
traditional power plants, which,
in many countries, are the largest
sources of polluted water
Gender equality
Clean water & sanitation
affordable and
Clean enerGy
industry, deCent work and eConomiC Growth
innovation and
infrastruCture
reduCed
inequalities
Access to electricity and improved
cooking stoves make rural
communities sustainable
sustainable Cities
and Communities
responsible
Consumption and
produCtion
Reduced 23
million tons of
CO2 equivalent
Climate aCtion
life below water
Forestry management
in Sierra Leone, 100 ha
reforestation in Benin,
170 ha of mangroves
rehabilitated in Côte
d’Ivoire, and planting 2
million jatropha in Mali to
help increase biodiversity
and generate energy from
biomass
life on land
National standards on biomass
in Ethiopia, biomass strategy in
Uganda, community-based tree
planting in Central African Republic,
and public-private partnership for
biogas in Botswana
peaCe, justiCe, and stronG
institutions No Poverty
Increases income-earning capability
including training 25,000 micro
entrepreneurs in Chad and solar-based
multifunctional platforms for 40 villages in
Mauritania and 309 villages in Mali
Full solar electrification of
hospitals 24 Cameroon,13 in
Zambia; 6 in Tanzania; 4 in
Liberia; providing refrigerated
vaccines and drugs to over
100,000 beneficiaries
Good health and well-beinG
Enhances health and wellbeing:
• 192 solar lamps for schools
in Cameroon increases
learning hours
• Solar center at Zambia
University trains solar
engineers
quality eduCation
Enhances educational
outcomes:
Increases
earnings capacities, creates job opportunities,
and reduces health hazards
Icreases transfer, dissemination
and diffusion of environmentally
sound technologies; technical and
vocational skills developed for
25,000 people in Chad; rent-to-buy
purchase scheme in Botswana; UNDP,
through GEF, mobilized $545 million
between 2014 and 2018
partnerships for
the Goals
Zero hunGer
Increases access to food:
• Solar and biomass cookstoves
for over 5,000 households in Côte
d’Ivoire • Solar irrigation systems in
northern Ghana
iii
1
Access to energy
% of population
70% +
50-69 %
30-49 %
20-29%
<19%
No data
Map 1: Access to electricity in Africa is very low
1 CONTEXT: ENERGY ACCESS IN AFRICA
1. Access to energy is critical to Africa’s development and growth. Energy is the
sustenance of all economies and an enabler of better welfare; where there is a deficit in
supply, this cripples economic growth and destroys livelihoods. Due to the urgent need
to rapidly reduce carbon emissions and respond to the highly negative impact of climate
change, there is a strong push towards promoting economic diversification and value chain
development, accelerating access to energy in remote areas, and addressing the challenge
of geographically complex terrain, all of which make expansion of access to renewable
energy sources a development imperative.
2. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
emphasizes the imperatives of achieving universal energy access through increases in access
to renewable energy and improvement in energy efficiency.1
 This is also a critical component
of the Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) initiative of the United Nations Secretary-General,
which was established in 2011. This target is premised on the understanding that energy
access2
 is critical to accelerate rapid economic growth, empower women, reduce poverty
and improve living conditions.
3. Access to energy in Africa is
too low to meet development
objectives. As of 2016, four out of
ten people in sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA) have access to electricity,
compared to about nine out of ten
globally. Also, 16 of the world’s 20
largest energy-deficit countries in
2016 are in SSA.3
 Furthermore, SSA
accounts for 57 per cent of the global
electricity access deficit, affecting
609 million people. Unless urgent
actions are taken, this may increase
to 654 million Africans without
energy by 2030.
4. Regional averages can mask a
country’s specific context. Globally,
North African countries rank among
countries with the highest levels of access to electricity. In all other African countries (except
Mauritius, Seychelles, Gabon, South Africa, Ghana, and Cabo Verde), less than 80 per cent
1 Goal 7 of the SDGs is to be achieved through the following three targets: Target 7.1, “By 2030, ensure universal access to affordable,
reliable and modern energy services.”; Target 7.2, “By 2030, increase substantially the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix.”;
and Target 7.3, “By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency.”
2 As defined by the International Energy Agency (IEA), energy access is a household having access to electricity and to a relatively clean,
safe means of cooking.
3
 In descending order, these countries are Nigeria, Ethiopia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Tanzania, Uganda, Kenya, Sudan,
Mozambique, Madagascar, Angola, Malawi, Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali and South Sudan. The non-African countries are India, Bangladesh
and Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. See World Bank (2017) and Africa Progress Panel (2017).
Source: Author’s compilation from IEA 2017
2
Figure 1. Access to electricity in Africa, 2000-2016 (%)
of the population have access to electricity. In at least 14 African countries, less than 20 per
cent of the population have access to electricity (see Figure 1). This notwithstanding, six
of the ten African countries experiencing the fastest rates of growth in electricity access
between 1990 and 2014 are Morocco, Cabo Verde, Botswana, Republic of the Congo, Ghana
and Comoros. However, between 2000 and 2016, the seven fastest growing countries are
Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Lesotho, Mozambique, Uganda and Chad while Djibouti and
Zimbabwe regressed.
5. There are real challenges to increasing energy access, but opportunities abound.
The energy challenge in Africa is not limited to access, but also includes its quality,
reliability, affordability and duration. The prohibitive cost of electricity is an impediment
to access. Access to electricity is also concentrated in urban areas; most hard-to-reach
rural communities are excluded, and urban slums often experience intermittent supply.
For instance, only about 1 per cent of the rural populations, in ten African countries had
Source: Author’s compilation from IEA
>80%
50-80%
3
access to electricity in 2016.4
 Overall, the shortage of energy is costing African economies
an annual average of up to 4 per cent of its GDP (APP, 2017), i.e. about US$60.52 billion in
2016 current market prices. The inability of countries to keep up with population growth
and limited political commitment to investment in the energy sector are among the factors
explaining why SSA is experiencing a large energy deficit. The challenge of using energy
access to mitigate climate change underpins the imperatives of renewable energy in closing
Africa’s energy gap.
6. Unless urgent actions are taken to scale up access to energy, it may become an overwhelming
challenge to achieve SDG 7. This Policy Brief showcases UNDP’s efforts with national partners
to facilitate and increase access to renewable energy. It also shows the potential for scaling
up off-grid initiatives across the continent.
2 AFRICA’S RENEWABLE ENERGY POTENTIAL
7. Africa has unique potential to scale up energy access to modernize agriculture;
rekindle industrialization; increase jobs; and reduce poverty and reduce exclusion.
Due to the geographic landscape of African countries, particularly rural communities,
access to the national grid is very difficult and expensive. Cost-effective renewable energy
therefore becomes the most effective solution to rural electrification in Africa. This solution
unleashes the productive capacity of around two-thirds of the population of many African
4
 These countries are Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, South Sudan, Burkina Faso, Guinea,
Guinea Bissau, Liberia and Niger (IEA, 2017).
By many measures, South Africa leads sub-Saharan Africa in generating renewable energy, yet dramatic increases must be made
for the continent to meet the Agenda 2030 goals. Source: Energy Intelligence
Map 2. Renewable energy power plants in South Africa
4
countries, including South Africa, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Kenya. For example, the recently signed Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer
Programme in South Africa is expected to create 61,600 jobs.5
8. Good news: Over the past decade, the cost of providing electricity through renewable
energy has decreased considerably and is becoming competitive with conventional energy
sources such as coal, gas and oil. For instance, the cost of a solar home system dropped
from $1,000 to $350 over the past five years.6
 This emerging trend offers African countries
real opportunities to be creative when increasing access to affordable and reliable energy;
utilizing decentralized energy sources will play a critical role. Further, forming partnerships
with the private sector to identify and use optimal business models that help achieve
affordable and reliable energy access will also be critical to achieving SDG 7 in Africa.
9. Despite the declining cost of producing renewable energy, these renewable energy
resources remain largely untapped in Africa. The potential for renewable energy cuts
across most African countries. (Box 1 presents the potential for Nigeria; Box 2 for Ghana;
and Box 3 for Chad and Madagascar.) Yet, their potential is enormous for transforming lives
and livelihoods, and facilitating the achievement of the SDGs. Renewable energy offers
the potential to quickly transform agricultural value addition, create decent jobs, mitigate
the impact of climate change, improve the delivery of education and health care services,
as well as transform livelihoods and living conditions in remote and rural communities. If
access increases sufficiently, it will provide affordable, reliable and sustainable energy for
all, thus helping to address poverty and leaving no one behind in the energy revolution. As
the United Nations Secretary-General noted recently, “Energy is vital to our lives […] Access
to energy helps children to study at night, farmers to grow more crops and hospitals to
provide better care.”7
10. Africa’s population growth is creating imbalances between electricity demand
and supply, leading to a rising energy deficit. SSA has not been able to keep up with
an increased demand for access to electricity that has resulted from population growth. The
number of people without electricity rose from about 500 million in 2000 to 609 million
in 2014 (World Bank, 2017). Good news: the pace of electrification tripled since 2012. This
made the population without access to electricity to fall to 588 million in 2016. However,
unless this effort is sustained and improved, this may rise to 645 million by 2030. The recent
improvement is based on increased investment and the realization that the traditional
on-grid system does not work in Africa due to its topography and low population density
and the remoteness of most of its villages and rural communities. Poor capacities for
transmission and distribution make rural access to electricity very challenging. SSA has the
highest number of countries with connection charges higher than $100 per customer at the
lowest connection service rating (World Bank, 2017:31). Therefore, since most of the poor
people live in rural areas, demand for electricity is very low due to low income and thus the
supply of on-grid infrastructure is not commercially viable. Leveraging the opportunities of
renewable energy in the context of geographically challenging areas and rising population
rates is an imperative.
5 See Radebe (2018) for the provincial distribution of jobs to be created.
6 The home solar system includes a television, a radio and two LED lights (see ODI, 2016).
7
 United Nations Chief Guterres highlights the importance of sustainable energy in his Expo 2017 message, see https://goo.gl/RrCKbY
5
11. UNDP, through the Regional Bureau for Africa (RBA) is well positioned to play a
leading role in helping to increase access to energy. RBA is operating in 46 countries
on the African continent, more than 65 per cent of which have ongoing programmes in
renewable energy – biomass, solar and/or wind (Annex). Partnerships between UNDP
and the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) have contributed immensely towards these
programmes; for example, between 2014 and March 2018, $544.9 million was mobilized
through them. Climate change adaptation as well as energy and infrastructure have the
largest share of the resources (Figure 2). Through these partnerships, 13 projects, totaling
about $484 million, are being developed for submission for funding in 2018 to the Green
Climate Fund and 11 other projects are at the early stage of development, totaling about
$220 million.8
12. UNDP’s engagement in the energy sector in Africa covers the three main targets of SDG
7: renewable energy, energy access and energy efficiency. Given indoor pollution, which
accounts for about 4.3 million deaths every year on the continent, about 20 per cent of
UNDP’s energy portfolio between 2012 and 2015 was invested in energy-efficient cookstove
projects. UNDP’s portfolio in Africa covers 3,472 communities and 3.35 million people,
ranging from 24,000 in Lesotho to 879,162 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
also contributing to a reduction in carbon emissions of 23 million ton (ibid).9

13. In Africa, the installed capacity of power plants and other installations that use renewable
energy to produce electricity is low, at less than 2 per cent of the global total, compared to
4 per cent in Asia. However, there is a significant annual increase (12.2 per cent), which is
comparable to Asia (13.0 per cent) and well above the global average (8.8 per cent). The areas
on which UNDP focuses are catalytic, including: helping countries establish and enforce
quality standards; creating platforms to transfer knowledge, for learning and for incubation;
8
 See UNDP (2018) for the countries involved.
9
 See UNDP (2017) for detailed information on the coverage and dimensions of the energy portfolio in Africa.
15.91
47.68
71.92
80.86
153.46
175.07
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Ecosystems	and	biodiversity
Water	and	oceans
Ozone	and	chemicals
Climate	 resilient	 development
Energy	and	infrastructure
Climate	 change	adaptation
Figure 2. Resources mobilized for Africa through UNDP-GEF partnership, 2014-2018 (US $million)
Source: Author’s compilation from UNDP (2018b)
6
Box 1: UNDP’s efforts to help resolve the renewable energy paradox in Nigeria
Nigeria’s energy access presents a paradox. In 2016, the country flared 6.9 billion standard cubic
meters (scm) of natural gas (about 9.5 per cent of daily production), translating to between US$700
million and US$1.00 billion during 2014-2016. Moreover, in Nigeria, the daily average of solar
radiation is 19.8 MJ/m2
/day 1, which is untapped for solar energy, which the Government projected
to be as high as 6,000 MW. The country also has capacity to generate at least 1,100 MW of electricity
from biomass and 800 MW from wind by 2030. Yet, less than 60 percent of the population have access
to electricity. Irregular energy supply leads to the proliferation of small diesel generators, which are
more expensive than renewable energy and lead to noise and air pollution as well as health hazards.
UNDP contributes to harnessing untapped biomass and solar resources for energy access in many
ways. Regarding biomass, UNDP efforts include supporting forestry management to balance demand
for firewood, scaled up improved cookstoves to reduce deforestation in Delta and Kaduna States, and
manufacturing efficient cookstoves in Bwari Local Government in Abuja. This partnership motivated
the governments to distribute 750,000 clean cook stoves and 18,000 wonderbags in 2014 alone (FGN,
2016). To address ecological problems such as deforestation and desertification, the National Clean
Cooking Scheme (NCCS) aims to distribute over 20 millions of clean cook stoves by 2020.
Regarding solar energy, UNDP supported the following activities: the preparation of the National
Energy Master Plan; the development of off-grid solar-PV for homes, street lighting and health delivery
in 12 communities in North Eastern Nigeria and 14 villages in Bwari Local Government in Abuja; the
fabrication of solar-powered agro-processing machines for women in Ebonyi, Nassarawa, Benue,
Jigawa, Ogun and Kano States; solar electrification in Edo State (Odighi and Ofetebe communities)
and in Nasarawa State (Roguwa community). This includes training of youths for installation and
maintenance of solar facilities.
Opportunities and lessons for transformation abound. These include: providing affordable
market-based solutions; de-risking the environment through matching grants; strengthening the
participation of value chain market-based actors; hands-on training; adopting to fit local technology
and practices; promoting demand-driven initiatives, ensuring that renewable energy initiatives open
up businesses for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs); and putting in place exit strategies.
There is enormous opportunity for renewable energy in Nigeria due to a population of around 73
million without access to electricity and the abundance of untapped renewable energy resources
including surface solar irradiance averaging about 1,700 kWh/m2 in the northern part of the country.
The Government’s SE4ALL Action Agenda aims at developing new biomass energy sources such as
pellets, briquettes, biogas and liquid fuels (e.g. ethanol) and create self-sustaining entrepreneurial
network of rural micro-entrepreneurs for achieving this. UNDP is ready to accompany the Federal and
State Governments and the private sector to achieve these goals.
Source: UNDP Nigeria Office Case study; Federal Government of Nigeria (FGN, 2016); World Bank (2016).
1
 MJ/m2/day means megajoules per square meter per day
7
and setting up infrastructure and other mechanisms to roll out renewable energy products
and services where governments and/or the private sector are unable to do so, mainly on a
pilot basis.
3 UNDP’S LIFE-TRANSFORMING ENGAGEMENTS AND EMERGING
OPPORTUNITIES
14. More countries are prioritizing renewable energy. The 2015 Paris Climate Agreement
has rekindled interest in investing in renewable energy. Further, as stated in the State of
Electricity Access Report 2017, global investment in renewable energy has more than
doubled the investments in conventional energy sources since 2015, and investment in
developing countries outpaced those of developed countries. Indeed, 147 out of the 189
countries that submitted intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs) emphasized
the importance of renewable energy.
15. The ambition from Sub-Saharan African countries, if backed up by actions, is very
promising. For instance, Nigeria is targeting 100% electricity access by 2030, using both
grid extension and 13 gigawatts (GW) of off-grid solar photovoltaic (PV); Sudan is planning
to provide 1.1 million solar home installations by 2030; and Ghana aims to provide 2 million
households with solar lanterns (IEA, 2017).
16. RBA advocates for least-cost energy solutions that mitigate risks and offer
business opportunities. With predictable financing mechanisms, better planning,
regulatory frameworks, enhanced coordination and enhanced technical skills, the cost of
energy access can be affordable to the poor. UNDP’s approach is to advocate and promote
the least-cost solutions that mitigate risks and offer viable business opportunities. In
In Swaziland, bi-products of refining sugar are used to generate electricity
8
particular, in Africa, UNDP’s role is to advocate and promote the practices that could make
universal energy achievable by 2030 (including building capacities of small and medium
enterprises).
17. In addition to hydropower mini-grids deployed in several African countries (e.g. Democratic
Republic of the Congo10, Republic of the Congo, Central African Republic, Guinea, Lesotho
and Malawi), UNDP also supported energy efficiency in several countries, (e.g. the support
to 140 people in Rochama and Achada Church in Santa Cruz Municipality, Cabo Verde).
UNDP’s measures to promote renewable energy access in Africa cover the following areas:
•	 Advocacy: Piloting mini-schemes for stakeholders to appreciate the value of renewable
energy and how imperative it is to help people build better lives. These schemes involve
biomass, solar and wind energy.
•	 Policy: Facilitating the development of a mixed national energy policy that emphasizes
renewable energy, especially in countries with large, untapped renewable energy
resources. This also entails contributing to the establishment of simple and clear rules for
scaling up renewable energy including risk mitigation, and fiscal and market incentives
that lead to win-win situations for beneficiaries, entrepreneurs and governments.
This applies to most countries in which UNDP operates (e.g. Chad, Cameroon, Côte
d’Ivoire, Ghana and Senegal). The engagement in these countries includes supporting
governments to prepare national strategies and action plans on renewable energy.
•	 Regulatory: Helping to facilitate non-obstructive and simple regulatory frameworks
that guarantee standards and quality (products and services) that protect all segments
of renewable value chains, including customers. Rwanda’s regulatory framework offers
a good example11; the payment for environmental service scheme in Madagascar
incentivizing the conservation of threatened species; working with governments to
prepare SE4ALL implementation plan (e.g. Tanzania, and Nigeria); and working with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on legal and regulatory
framework on the energy sector.
•	 Technical: Ensuring the transfer of technology to local operators, which is a panacea
for sustainability. Technical skills that help provide quality power and meet future
energy needs are key to success. Facilitating the training of local people to maintain
and produce renewable energy helps develop entrepreneurship and job opportunities.
UNDP’s operations in Angola, Chad, Kenya, Niger, and Nigeria offer good examples of
this.
•	 Financial: Ensuring commercial viability of renewable energy, especially among rural
dwellers is vital to achieve universal energy access. Working with partners to promote
long-term financial support in the form of loans, grants and subsidies incentivize
private firms to invest in renewable energy and rural electrification. It is also important
to promote low-cost solutions. To this end, the UNDP Nigeria – Bank of Industry,
the Rwanda-Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), and
the Government of Tanzania-Tanzania Investment Bank Renewable Energy Fund
partnerships were established.12
10 UNDP helped implement three micro-hydropower electricity plants between 2016 and 2017 (Idjwi, Bitale, and Masisi); developed
electricity legal and regulatory framework and improved cook stove and biogas fuel. UNDP’s interventions in the country (e.g.
North Kivu, South Kivu, Tshopo, etc) benefited 10,000 households.
11 The Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Agency (RURA) offers a 70 per cent subsidy on investments in privately owned and operated
mini-grids of up to 100 kW installed capacity, and those on isolated grids under 50 kW are exempted from licensing (see World Bank,
2017).
12 The Renewable Energy Fund of $500 per mini-grid household connection, managed by the Tanzania Investment Bank is another 
9
Box 2: UNDP’s efforts to promote access to renewable energy in Ghana
Ghana is one of the few African countries with successful stories on electricity access. Between
2000 and 2016, its electricity access rate increased from 45 percent to 84 percent – thanks to the
committed implementation of the 1989 National Electrification Scheme and policies focused on rural
communities.
Ghana has a high electricity access rate of over 80 per cent of the population. In the recent past,
however, low water levels caused by droughts and unstable gas supply have led to load shedding.
The policy goal is to increase the total installed capacity from 3,200 MW to 5,000 MW, and to increase
share of renewable energy from 0.1 now to 10 per cent by 2020 with a view to leveraging the
country’s renewable energy potential. This is to be achieved through: 150-300 MW of small and
medium hydro power plants; two million solar lanterns; 30,000 solar home systems; 20-26 MW of
utility-scale biomass and waste energy capacity; 150-250 MW of utility-scale wind; and 50-150 MW
of utility-scale solar capacity.
The potential for renewable energy is high. For instance, the country is estimated to have about
2,700 m3
 of biomass, which could generate over 110 megawatts (MW) of power. This source alone
could create more than 26,000 direct jobs along the value chain (KNUST, 2015). Despite this robust
opportunity, biomass co-generation plants, which use sawmill residue and oil palm waste, have
a total capacity of over 6 MW (Africa-EU RECP, n.d.). About 13,000 Ghanaians died annually from
air pollution mostly due to 71 percent of the population relying on solid biomass for cooking
(IEA, 2017). This among others revamped Government interest to accelerate access to improved
cooking facilities.
The potential for wind and solar is even more. For instance, the average annual wind speed
above 50 m is 8 m/s and could be as high as 9.9 m/s in certain locations. The monthly average
solar radiation is between 4.4 and 5.6 kWh/m2
/day with sunshine duration between 1,800 and
3,000 hours per year (RVO, 2016). Several companies have started to leverage this potential for
investment and business opportunities.
UNDP has worked with the Government in many areas to facilitate the achievement of its renewable
energy target. The first area is helping to establish the regulatory framework that focuses on standards
of efficiency and performance of cook stoves. The second is helping to promote technology transfer
including the establishment of the renewable energy centre at the Kwame Nkrumah University of
Science and Technology. The third is piloting solar irrigation systems in deprived communities. And
finally, UNDP has established the small grants mechanism to promote renewable energy technology
transfer.
Regulations and standards, and their enforcement continue to be important lessons to be learned.
An important opportunity for Ghana is solar energy, especially in the northern part of the country,
which has a photovoltaic power potential of up to 1,600 kWh/kWP. The implementation of a rooftop
solar programme will be particularly useful. The development of mini-grids – using a tested,
optimally affordable business model – would be desirable, particularly for rural dwellers. Fiscal
incentives include: exemption from import duties; a feed-in-tariff system; access to a power purchase
agreement; and the establishment of a renewable energy fund.
Sources: UNDP Ghana Office Case study; KNUST (2015); RVO (2016); and Africa-EU RECP (n.d.).
10
3.1 Biomass
18. Turning waste into energy increases access to electricity, stimulates small-scale
business growth, and propels economic transformation. Based on available data, over
60 per cent of country offices in RBA countries with renewable energy programmes focus
on improving biomass value chains. Notable examples include: transferring technology
and delivering energy-efficient technologies; improving legislation and standards; and
sourcing of biomass (e.g. forestry and landfills). Examples of UNDP projects include: smallscale
bioenergy woodlots in Port Loko and Moyamba in Sierra Leone; briquette technology
in Kenya; community-based forest management in Angola; the piloted biogas plant in
Sengerema District in the United Republic of Tanzania ; the bio-coal Typha valorization
project in Senegal; and the cookstove testing and expertise lab in Ghana. See Box 2 on
biomass potential in Ghana.
19. There are enormous opportunities to significantly scale up biomass initiatives in most
African countries. Rapid urbanization accompanied with serious shortages of effective and
modern waste infrastructure in SSA makes the case more appealing for waste-to-energy or
wealth initiatives. The presence of landfills in most cities and agricultural waste in rural areas
creates further opportunities for similar initiatives.
20. There are emerging opportunities to use waste feedstock to generate energy in Africa
in commercial quantities. Some examples are: the Landfill Gas to Energy Project in,
Johannesburg, South Africa; Municipal Solid Waste Composting Project in Ikorodu and the
Ketu Ikosi Biogas Project in Lagos, Nigeria; the biogas plant at Kumasi Abattoir in Kumasi,
Ghana; the Pilot Biogas Initiative in Ferlo, Senegal; the Gorge farm anaerobic digestion (AD)
power plant in Naivasha, Kenya; and the Koshe Waste to Energy Project in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia.
21. UNDP is committed to maximizing opportunities for turning waste into energy in order to
increase access to electricity, stimulate small-scale enterprise growth in the energy sector,
and propel economic diversification and transformation. However, critical efforts must be
undertaken to commercialize associated technologies in an affordable manner and ensure
standardization for quality and safety.
de-risking efforts to promote renewable energy in Africa. Moreover, the Government of Tanzania in partnership with the African
Development Bank is developing a Renewable Energy Investment Facility to further de-risk the investment climate for renewable
energy (UNDP Tanzania Country Office Case Study).
In Naivasha, Kenya, a biomass plant generates electricity and produces rich fertilizer as a bi-product 
11
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Asia	Pacific Europe	and	
Eurasia
North	
America
South	and	
Central	
America
Africa Middle	East
48.4
35
14.4
1 0.8 0.5
 Figure 3.Figure	2:	 Cummulative	installed	capacity,	solar,	2016	(%) Cumulative installed solar energy capacity, 2016 (%)
Source: Author’s compilation from BP (2016b).
3.2 Solar
22. Africa is one of the most richly endowed regions with the highest global surface
solar radiation, yet the continent’s share of the world’s generated solar energy is
less than 1 per cent.
Globally, solar energy
is one of the most
untapped clean
energy sources.
In 2016, the share
of solar power
generation was 1.3
per cent, more than
tripling in four years.
In the same year, it
increased by 29.6
per cent.13 Despite
Africa’s large share of
the global population (16.5 per cent) and even though Africa will account for over 80 per cent
of the net global population by 2100, its 2016 share of the cumulative installed capacity of
solar energy was too low (Figure 3). Africa’s installed capacity falls short of its potential. SubSaharan
Africa (SSA) alone accounted for about 19 percent of global potential PV elecricity
output (1994-2015) (Figure 4). This lack of investment is disproportional to Africa’s natural
endowment of potential solar energy. For instance, in 2016, Germany’s share of the global
solar energy installed capacity was 13.7 per cent, yet it has an annual average of irradiance
of 125 W/m2 compared to Africa’s 0.8 per cent share of installed capacity, which boasts an
annual average of irradiance of between 220-300 W/m2
.
14 The Sahel and the Horn of Africa
are even more advantaged, with irradiance (surface solar radiation) of over 280 W/m2
.
15 The
cover page presents the potential for Africa relative to the rest of the world and boxes 1-3
present for Nigeria,
Ghana, Chad, and
Madagascar.
23. UNDP is working
with partners on
innovative pilot
p r o g r a m m e s
for scaling up
renewable energy
in Africa such as:
a solar irrigation
system in northern
Ghana; solar lamps
for primary schools,
health centres
13 Countries leading the cumulative installed capacity are: China (78.1 GW), Japan (42.8 GW), Germany (41.3 GW) and the United
States of America (40.3 GW) (see BP, 2016).
14 See BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2017 for each country’s breakdown. 15 For surface solar radiation, see https://goo.gl/HfPjrh
Figure 4: Potential PV electricity output (1994-2015)
 Source: Author’s computation from http://globalsolaratlas.info/downloads/sub-saharan-africa;
Landmass compiled from WDI.
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
20.00
South	Asia MENA Others	
including	
North	
America
Latin	
America	
and	the	
Caribbean
East	Asia	
and	Pacific
Europe	and	
Central	
Asia
SSA
4.03
9.49
16.09 16.18 17.01
18.13
19.07
12
Box 3: Renewable energy opportunities in Chad and Madagascar
Madagascar: In 2015, energy access reached 15 per cent of the population, of whom 54 per cent
in the urban areas and 6 per cent in rural areas. The high-level of deficit presents opportunities for
expansion. The Government has set a target of 70 per cent energy access by 2030 with solar and
wind rising from about 1 to 10 per cent. The country is endowed with over 350 potential sites of
small hydroelectric plants with a cumulative capacity of 1,350 MW; an annual average of 2,000 kWh/
m2
 of solar radiation (photovoltaic potential); and wind power of 7-8 m/s. To attract investors, the
Government introduced a tax reduction of 50 per cent for renewable energy investments and
exemption from duties and taxes on various renewable energy equipment (e.g. PV panels, solar kits
and 2V batteries). To promote climate change mitigation, the environmental service scheme was
introduced. This payment for environmental services, which is community based, helps to incentivize
the conservation of threatened species.
Chad: Electricity in Chad is scarce, expensive and erratic in supply. As of 2012, only 6.4 per cent of
Chadians had access to electricity. The State of Electricity Report 2017 rated Chad as the 18th largest
electricity access deficit globally. The per capita electricity consumption is one of the lowest in the
world and tariffs are among the highest. Yet the photovoltaic power potential ranges from 1,680
to 2,045 kWh/kWp annually from the south to the north. This can play a strong role in bridging the
electricity deficit with solar alone having the potential to generate more than 10 per cent by 2030
(World Bank, 2017). The wind potential in the Central Region, for instance, could reach as high as
7-7.5 m/s. UNDP’s engagement consists in strengthening regulatory frameworks (e.g. helping to
prepare the national strategy on renewable energy, energy coordination), facilitating access (e.g.
distributing cookstoves to 9,500 households) and promoting technology transfer and diffusion (e.g.
at least 25,000 people have learned better techniques for the use and manufacture of solar cookers).
The opportunities for expanding solar energy production are significantly untapped, together with
other renewable energy sources, such as biomass and wind. Enabling policy instruments to partner
with the private sector provides the greatest opportunity to expand renewable energy in Chad.
Sources: UNDP Madagascar and Chad Offices Case studies.
An 8.5 Megawatt solar field at the Agahozo-Shalom Youth Village in Rwanda, a country where less than 15 per cent of the
population has access to power. With the solar project, the East African nation’s generating capacity surged by six per cent.
13
The wind farm in Ashegoda, Ethiopia, is one of the largest in Africa Box 4: Solar lights up new hope for the remote Nyatsato Primary School,
Zimbabwe and for health centres in Zambia
Zimbabwe: Nyatsato Primary School is in Rushinga District, Mashonaland Central, about 240 km
away from Harare- few kilometers from Mozambique’s border. The lack of electricity in the school
caused hardship for students and teachers alike. The installation of 4.08 kW power systems for
lighting two school blocks, powering computer lab, as well as lighting, information sharing and
entertainment (e.g. TV and radio) for six teachers houses brought hope in 2015. The school teaching
and management staff were trained to be able to use and maintain the equipment.
The students use the classrooms at nights to read and have the privilege of being taught computer
lessons while teachers complemented their studies using the light to study after school hours. The
community has also expressed interest in taking literacy lessons after their children’s lessons are
finished. The savings from non-purchase of paraffin and candles because of the solar system is being
contemplated for buying communal refrigerator and television.
Zambia: In cooperation with Innovation Norway and four private sector companies, UNDP led a
pilot project to demonstrate how renewable energy improves quality and delivery of healthcare
by installing solar power systems in 13 health facilities and Central Medical Store in Zambia. As a
priority, the solar systems distributed energy to the most critical parts of the hospitals including
emergency rooms, surgery, pharmacies, labs, vaccine refrigerators, and delivery rooms. Maternity
wards received electricity 24 hours, seven days per week; vaccines remained available and cold. A
hybrid battery system, using lead-lithium ion batteries, provides efficient storage, competitive unit
costs, and an eight-year lifespan. The performance and usage of the system can be monitored offsite.
For repairs, a “remote repair” scheme uses phone or Skype to provide technical assistance.
85,000 beneficiaries – half of whom are children or women of child bearing age – received higher
quality, reliable healthcare; the number of consultations increased sharply (by between 80-100%)
as did access to vaccines, which are now stored on-site. Since the health facilities could now be
open and operating during the night, the number of deliveries and emergency services increased
dramatically as well.
Sources: UNDP Zimbabwe and Zambia Office Case studies
A solar home in Rwanda demonstrates that energy from the sun can be harnessed at the village level
14
and vocational training centres in Cameroon; the establishment of a guaranteed fund in
Ethiopia; the distribution of solar kits in the west and north regions of Côte d’Ivoire; the solarbased
multifunctional platforms and rural streetlights in Togo; the solar pumping system
for market gardens in Niger; the multi-functional solar platforms in Burkina Faso; the rural
electrification in the Damara province of the Central African Republic; solar electrification
access in Kayes, Koulikoro, Segou, Sikasso, Mopti and Gao regions in Mali; the GEF Small
Grants Programme implemented by UNDP, which resulted in 24,634 people having
access to clean energy in Guinea-Bissau; the rent-to-buy purchase scheme in Botswana;
the establishment of a solar centre at the University of Zambia; and the UNDP-GEF solar
cooker project in South Africa. UNDP also provided technical and financial support to the
manufacturing and distribution of solar stoves, including in Chad and Nigeria. In Chad, for
instance, solar stoves were distributed to 9,500 households (See Box 3) while in Zimbabwe,
it brought hope to the remote Nyatsato Primary School (See Box 4).
24. Solar energy is a potential driver of economic diversification and growth in Africa.
Opportunities lie in expanding investments to scale. This growth will require supporting
quality standards in solar equipment, investing in training, removing bottlenecks for
the private sector, and actively pushing for partnerships. UNDP has been working with
stakeholders to deliver solar technologies, deepen market penetration, and promote
technology transfer including through incubation.
 Figure 5: Wind power density potential
 Source: author’s creation from https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/globalwindatlas/posters/AFR_PD.png
Capacity (W/m2
)
Speed (m/s)
15
 Figure 6: Global cumulative installed wind turbine capacity, 2016 (%)
 Source: Author’s compilation from BP (2016a).
3.3 Wind Energy
25. Africa is endowed with on-shore and off-shore wind energy. The wind capacity
requirement for electricity generation varies from an annual average wind speeds greater
than 4 meters per second (m/s) (9 mph) for small wind turbines and a minimum of 6 m/s
(13 mph) for utility-scale wind power plants (Tiyou, 2016). The African average is 6.47 m/s.
This ranges from below 4 m/s (Gabon and Congo, Rep. of) to above 9 m/s (Djibouti, Chad,
and Kenya). See Figure 5 for wind power density potential for selected African countries
compared to global leaders in installed capacities (UK, Canada, USA, China, Spain, Germany,
and India).
26. Africa’s investment in wind energy is low, yet the potential benefits are high. Africa’s global
share of the installed wind turbine capacity is very low, at 0.8 per cent compared to 40.4 per
cent in Asia and the Pacific, 34.2 per cent in Europe and Eurasia, and 20.9 per cent in North
America (Figure 6). In spite of the high potential, the continent of Africa’s installed wind
energy capacity is less than 5.0 per cent of China’s, 6.0 per cent of the United States, 12 per
cent of Germany’s and 40 per cent of Brazil’s installed capacities16.
16 Author’s computation from Wind Energy Market Intelligence
16
27. South Africa, the African country with the largest installed wind energy capacity, offers some
lessons. Based on the objective of using renewable energy to further transform the economy
structurally, wind projects were selected based on key criteria: pricing, job creation, local
content policy and black economic empowerment. Wind energy project in South Africa is
based on Public Private Partnership and has been adjudged as one of the best practices
globally.17 Figure 7 presents wind energy installed capacity in Africa. When the ongoing
constructions are completed in Africa’s leading countries (South Africa, Morocco, Egypt,
Ethiopia, and Kenya), the collective installed capacity will reach 4.3 GW. The momentum
to accelerate progress is high. For instance, Morocco is aiming 2.0 GW by 2020 and Egypt
targets 2.0 GW by 2022 (Tiyou, 2016). As is the case for solar, the gradual decrease of the
cost of wind power generation is making it increasingly competitive relative to fossil fuels.
28. UNDP support in wind energy is still nascent (see Annex 1). Kenya is one of the African
countries boasting huge commercial wind energy production. In addition to the Ngong wind
farm project, which contributes 25.5 MW to the national grid, the country is developing the
largest wind power farm on the continent – the Lake Turkana wind farm. The South African
Wind Energy Programme (SAWEP) is one of the ongoing wind projects on the continent.
The Darling Wind Farm (5.2 MW) and the Klipheuwel Wind Farm (3.2 MW) are among the
success stories in generating wind power on the continent.18 Other countries with wind
energy potential should emulate Kenya’s and South Africa’s giant strides. This is an area
where UNDP needs to consider scaling up capacity in line with emerging demand.
17 As of 2016, it had a total installed wind turbine capacity of 1,170 MW with another 840 MW in the pipeline and a target of 8,400 MW of
wind capacity by 2030 (Tiyou, 2016).
18 See http://www.energy.gov.za/files/esources/renewables/r_wind.html
 Figure 7: African countries’ wind energy installed capacity (MW)
 Source: Author’s computation from Wind Energy Market Intelligence: https://www.thewindpower.net/country_list_en.php
17
3.4 MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
29. UNDP is using renewable energy to drive innovation and entrepreneurial
development in Africa. The renewable energy sector is creating opportunities for
entrepreneurial development that could accelerate Africa’s economic expansion and
transformation. Biomass, solar and wind power highlighted above provide opportunities
for youth and women to develop skills and generate employment and livelihoods on the
continent.
30. Developing skills of local actors in renewable energy provides a critical component of the
sustainability of renewable energy on the continent. Localization of renewable energy
technology through adaptation, diffusion and maintenance is central for sustainability. These
aspects create great opportunities for entrepreneurship. Even when such technologies are
affordable, ensuring local maintenance of such facilities makes a substantial difference.
31. UNDP is using emerging renewable energy to drive innovation on entrepreneurial
development in Africa. Some illuminating examples are as follows:
(a) In Kenya, in partnership with the Department for International Development (DfID)
of the United Kingdom, UNDP is promoting the incubation of private firms
through the Strengthening Adaptation and Resilience to Climate Change in Kenya
Plus (StARCK+) and through the Africa Enterprise Challenge Fund, which is helping
to promote competition in the energy market.
(b) In Ghana, the provision of subsidies to solar companies to derisk the renewable
energy market is promoting the involvement of small-scale enterprises.
(c) In Ethiopia, promoting technology roadshows, facilitating competitive schemes on
rural energy technology, and providing business advisory services are the focus of
partnerships with other actors.
(d) In Togo, through the Emergency Community Programme (PUDC), entrepreneurs
from micro and small enterprises are being trained to maintain and repair solar
energy equipment.
(e) In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, UNDP facilitated the construction of
three micro-hydropower plants in Idjwi, Bitale and Masisi, and mobilized the private
sector in the construction of mini- and micro-hydropower plants.
(f) In Nigeria, through the build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) business model, value
chain actors (mostly youth and women) were trained, empowered, and certified
as micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs); training focused on technical,
financial, business and marketing skills to scale-up renewable energy.
(g) In Chad, more than 25,000 people were trained on the techniques for manufacturing
solar cookers and improved metal stoves.
(h) In South Africa, emphasizing local content policy and the black economic
empowerment as important criteria for selecting renewable energy projects is
creating opportunities for entrepreneurial development.
18
4 LESSONS LEARNED
32. Regular access to electricity, especially in rural areas, enhances welfare. The
experience in Africa has shown that energy access is a life-transforming intervention. It
enhances rural access to ICTs (e.g. mobile phones and TV), life-comforting appliances (e.g.
heating systems), refrigeration (including foods, drugs and vaccines), modern agriculture
(solar pumping irrigation), direct and indirect income generating activities (repair and
maintenance of equipment), and acts as a catalyst for value chain development (e.g.
multifunctional platform and industrialization). Energy also has developmental impacts.
The use of fuel wood (which is as high as over 90 percent in the Gambia and Burundi) is a
major cause of deforestation and a serious source of health hazards and deaths in Africa.
Replacing this with improved cookstoves and lighting systems saves the continent from
deforestation, reduces pollution and decreases health hazards. Improved energy access
generates multiplier effects on the achievement of the SDGs.
33. Affordability, scalability and sustainability are interlinked and need to be
addressed together to produce synergistic results and impact. Lessons can be
drawn from UNDP’s experience over the past decades in partnerships and support to
renewable energy in Africa. Although affordability of renewable technologies remains a
challenge in most parts of Africa, there has been a declining trend of renewable energy costs
over the past five years. In addition, increasing economies of scale could further decrease
prices considerably. Based on country experiences, upfront payment for renewable energy
services is a good model for business continuity in rural areas.
34. Scalability is limited because solar technologies are imported rather than developed in
Africa. Investment in developing and assembling these technologies on the continent will
enable opportunities to scale production and availability. It will also ensure that renewable
energy becomes affordable and sustainable. UNDP’s partnership with domestic and
external stakeholders will explore the possibility of facilitating production and assembling
renewable energy infrastructure on the continent.
35. Sustainability is key to achieving renewable energy’s maximum impact. Several factors
contribute to the sustainability of renewable energy in Africa. The first is having national
capacity for domesticating appropriate policy instruments, standards and regulations.
These regulatory frameworks must be simple and clear, guarantee the quality of products
and services, and protect all segments of renewable value chains, especially the customers.
Second, community participation in the choice of business model and type of products
not only ensures sustainability but also creates affordability. In Nigeria, lessons drawn from
the cookstove initiative show that new tools must match cooking practices carried out at
community level for successful outcomes. Indeed, sustainability is strengthened when the
new tools align with local practices. Involving local actors in the design and management of
renewable energy products matters. The joint venture approach imbedded in the recently
signed Independent Power Purchase Agreement with South Africa provides illuminating
examples– South Africans hold 57.8 per cent of shares and local communities hold 7.1 per
cent of shares (Radebe, 2018). 
19
36. UNDP must encourage MSME investments in renewable energy through effective
financing schemes and helpful business strategies. Five key lessons emerge from
UNDP’s experience in facilitating renewable energy-based MSMEs in Africa. First, support
to MSMEs must have a clear exit strategy (with clear roles and responsibilities in the form
of a social contract) to avoid a dependency and entitlement syndrome. Second, ensuring
access to competitive financial products and services is key. However, in rural areas, such
products could be complemented with matching loans, funds, or partial money guarantees.
The term ‘subsidy’ should be avoided because of past experiences, which tend to
perpetuate dependency syndrome. Third, organizing MSMEs into platforms, networks and
cooperatives to share experiences, knowledge, and lessons learned is vital for sustainability.
Fourth, recognizing and rewarding successful entrepreneurs (including using innovative
entrepreneurs as champions) help promote innovation and productivity. Finally, promoting
technical partnerships between foreign and local firms will help develop entrepreneurship
and skills that are suitable for transferring and diffusing technologies.
5 CONCLUSIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY
PARTNERSHIPS
37. Stimulating universal access to renewable energy is essential to human and
economic development, and catalytic to achieving all SDGs in Africa, yet
renewable energy in Africa remains virtually untapped. Promoting energy access
in Africa is not only beneficial to the continent but also an imperative for global growth
and stability. For instance, efforts to reduce deforestation help to mitigate climate change
globally; boosting food production through solar irrigation systems, food refrigeration and
reductions in food wastage help improve food security globally. Mobilizing global actors
(governments, private sectors, foundations and international financial institutions) creates
a win-win situation for Africa and the world. Accelerating access to renewable energy on the
continent is not only an investment in Africa’s development, but also a global public good.
38. Stimulating universal access to renewable energy will not only contribute to the achievement
of SDG 7, but will also catalyse the achievement of all SDGs. In addition to helping transform
lives through education and health services (e.g. in Cameroon, Tanzania and Côte d’Ivoire)
and agricultural transformation (e.g. solar irrigation in Ghana and Ethiopia), it contributes
to creating jobs for youth and women (e.g. Chad and Nigeria) and diversifying economies
(e.g. Kenya and South Africa). Yet, renewable energy in Africa remains virtually untapped.
A similar trend pertains to biomass and wind energy. Helping build demand and increase
installed capacities for renewable energy in Africa are imperatives for achieving the SDGs
and Africa’s development agenda. The rising momentum to expand wind energy in South
Africa, Morocco, Egypt, Ethiopia, and Kenya is commendable. UNDP and other development
partners must help governments and other stakeholders to increase installed capacities of
renewable energy in Africa.
39. UNDP’s role and mandate to support access to energy in Africa is clear: to meet the
Agenda 2030 Goals, strong policy and partnership efforts must be implemented
urgently. The alignment between UNDP’s Strategic Plan (2018-2021) (with energy as
one of the six signature solutions) and the focus on renewable energy by 147 out of the
189 countries that submitted INDCs shows a harmonization of priorities. A coordinated 
20
partnership with UNDP offers opportunities to achieve synergy on SE4ALL, the Climate
Agreement and the SDGs.
40. UNDP is committed to work with stakeholders to facilitate the development of practical
solutions to close the electricity gap in Africa. Supporting stakeholders is important to
create an enabling environment for reliable, affordable and sustainable access to energy.
Such an environment must have the right policies, regulations and incentives for universal
and sustainable access to achieve SDG 7 by 2030.
41. UNDP’s contribution to renewable energy access in Africa is multi-dimensional (Annex and
Boxes 1-4). First, facilitating partnerships, including public-private sector engagement and
bilateral and multilateral collaboration on renewable energy in Africa is essential to UNDP’s
mission. Specifically, partnering with the private sector to promote the development
of optimal business models for affordable and reliable energy access is critical. Second,
connecting domestic and foreign investors and promoting small-scale development,
mentorship and entrepreneurship are important entry points. Third, it is important to
work with various actors to identify and ensure viable business models on rural access to
electricity and to ensure affordability, scalability and sustainability. Fourth, promoting social
entrepreneurs, building local capacity for maintenance and repair of renewable equipment
connects the renewable sub-sector to the rest of the economy. Fifth, UNDP is recognized for
working with partners to develop policies, plans and strategies on renewable energy and
in developing regulatory standards. Finally, working with African governments is needed to
bridge the financing gaps through blended financing mechanisms – grants, market-based
loans and philanthropy. 
21
Annex 1. Summary of UNDP interventions on renewable energy in Africa
Country Biomass Solar Wind MSMEs
Angola
Charcoal value chain; 5 pilot communities to benefit
from charcoal technology; training of staff of the
Institute of Forestry Development on sustainable
charcoal production
300 sets of solar storage systems; photovoltaic
panels for solar home system, solar lanterns and
advanced cook stoves.
Renewable energy gap analysis
conducted to establish investment
opportunities.
Benin
Biomass for green energy for on and off grid including
biomass gasifiers; 200 ha of reforestation; and bio
energy woodlots benefiting 4,818 people.
Energy services (lighting, recharging, freezing,
street lamps) for 41 municipalities benefiting
93,964 people
Analysis to help
identify feasible
investment in
wind energy
conducted.
Solar power plants providing energy
services MSMEs
Botswana
Uptake of biogas digesters through public-private
partnership with farmers and businesses.
Rent-to-buy purchase scheme for solar products
and 1 5.7 kW solar PV mini-grids for 4 villages in
Central District; distribution of lanterns
Community organization
Training for service
Rent to own financial mechanism; use
of public- private-partnership
Burkina Faso Provision of solar lighting and installation of Multifunctional solar platforms.
Burundi Institutional support and strategic analysis conducted.
Cameroon 108 lamps for schools, 84 lamps for vocational schools and 24 lamps for health centres.
Central
Africa
Republic
Community-based tree planting and afforestation. Supported development of regulatory
framework; initiated electrification in 7 pilot
villages in Damara area
Standards and regulations.
Chad Distribution of cookstoves to 9,500 households. Helped in preparing national strategy on renewable energy. Trained 25,000 people on solar cookers technology.
Côte d'Ivoire
Assisted several small-scale projects on biomass
including mangroves rehabilitation, protection of 170
ha of mangroves, anmnd distribution of 5000 cook
stoves and 70 ovens. .
Distribution of solar kits including 12 community
cocoa dryers.
Trained technicians and agents to
repair and manufacture stoves, ovens
and solar cocoa dryers. 
22
Country Biomass Solar Wind MSMEs
Democratic
Republic of
the Congo+
Supporting national programme to improve cook
stoves and biomass fuel.
Micro hydro plants.
Equatorial
Guinea
Interventions in 4 provinces and feasibility
carried out.
Feasibility studies
in 4 provinces.
Regulatory framework.
Eritrea Installation of solar panels.
Ethiopia
National s standards and advocacy on biomass and
improved cook stoves.
Standards for solar technologies awareness
raising; and installation of solar kits for 211,950
households (benefiting about 1.0 million
people).
Provision of credit risk guarantee fund;
technical skill training and support to
business incubation benefitting 1,038
businesses. .
Gambia Solar kits and solar powered MFP installed in 6 communities (e.g. Mamuda) benefiting 3,750.
Ghana
Regulatory framework and Standards (improved cook
stoves); Cook stove testing and expertise lab
established, standards).
Solar irrigation systems in 4 communities in
Northern Ghana; promoted exchange with
China on RE; plan to support the National
Rooftop Solar Programme.
Facilitated SWITCH Africa Green;
supported Ghana Alliance for Clean
Cookstove.
Guinea Installation domestic bio digesters in 44 communities benefiting 1,548 people. Installation of solar kits in town halls, places of worship, and health centers.
Guinea
Bissau
Bio digesters in 4 communities for electricity and
cooking gas benefiting 850 households.
Helped 10,000 families have access to solar
energy benefiting 24,634 people.
Kenya
Revision of charcoal regulation, investment in briquette
technology, reforestation and charcoal
commercialization.
Provision of equipment, training of technicians
(866); developed solar water heating system.
Wind power farms
(Turkana and
Ngong).
Established and trained National
Association of Charcoal Producers
(and in 3 counties), training of PV
technicians, promoted incubation
centres. And supported RE Fund
Liberia
18,000 benefitted from solar electrification of
health centres in Bong, Salala, Jundu and St.
Timothy.
Lesotho
Subsidized 1537 solar home systems and solar
PV system to 1 business centre and 7 income
generating activities.
Establishment of Lesotho Solar Energy
Society; training of 165 technicians, 5
instructors, and mainstreaming solar
PV in vocational training programmes
in the National University of Lesotho. . 
23
Country Biomass Solar Wind MSMEs
Madagascar+
Identification of feasible investment. Supported 50% tax reduction for renewable
energy especially solar energy and helping to
Identify feasible investment.
Identifying
feasible
investment.
Promotion of fiscal incentives on
renewable energy equipment (e.g. PV
panel, solar kits and 2V batteries).
Mali
About 18,000 ha of 2.0 million jatropha planted and 14
local nurseries established benefiting 1,000 farmers in
50 villages; 5 villages electrified through jatropha oil run
generators.
309 villages (31,531 people) benefited from
hybrid multifunctional platforms.
390 facilitators; 63 photovoltaic
installers; and 70 artisans’
manufacturer and repairer trained.
Mauritania
Solar-based multifunctional platforms for
refrigeration, television, battery charges, and
grain mills in rural communities benefiting
about 16,000 in 40 villages.
Electrification of 4
coastal
communities by
hybrid wind/diesel
generation
benefitting 2,000
people.
Public-private partnership regulatory
framework.
Niger
Five villages and 10,000 households change to biogas
from diesel to run multi-functional platform
Assisted with 252 solar pumps and 392
agricultural units (1 AU=0.25 ha).252 producers
and 70,000 inhabitants benefitted from solar
pumping of 65 garden sites (98 ha) in 2017
alone.
Platform for over 40 solar businesses.
Nigeria
Sustainable fuelwood supply and woodlot
management developed; improved cook stoves
manufactured and distributed; biogas rural electricity
generation piloted .
Supported renewable energy strategy and
master plan; Clean energy policy instruments
and capacity piloted in several communities;
off-grip solar PV for street lightening, borehole,
health delivery supported in north east Nigeria
including solar.
Design, fabrication and installation of
solar-powered agro-industries (e.g.
rice and cassava) supported; local
technicians trained on installation and
maintenance of renewable equipment
and manufacture of improved
cookstoves; etc.
Senegal
Production of bio-coals (e.g. Typha valorization project). Supported national renewable energy strategy;
capacity building of National Agency for RE; and
electrification of 420 villages through solar PV;
supported women association with solar lamp..
Platform for solar companies
supported; advocated for subsidies on
renewable energy equipment. .
Sierra Leone Charcoal (land refill). –
24
Country Biomass Solar Wind MSMEs
South Africa
UNDP-GEF solar cooker project completed in 2006. UNDP-GEF South
African Wind
Energy Project
(SAWEP) – Darling
wind farm.
The Fast Track High Resolution Wind
Map and the establishment of wind
data bank are to level playing fields for
small scale actors.
South Sudan Framework for renewable energy developed. Hybrid grid system developed; installation of solar system done.
Swaziland
Framework for clean energy, including biomass
developed.
Framework for clean energy, including solar developed. Framework for
clean energy,
including wind
developed.
Tanzania
Biogas energy plants in Mount Rungwe and
Sengerema Districts for pipes, stoves, and
lighting system.
More than 20 micro projects supported (e.g. Kegara);
solar water pumps; and solar power electricity in 6
hospitals for refrigeration of vaccines and theater
operations.
Renewable energy fund established;
investment prospectus developed and
Renewable investment facility being
developed.
Togo
– 10,000 solar street lights in rural Togo; 40
multifunctional solar platforms. Eco-village initiated to
benefit 1.022 million when completed.
Small enterprises to maintain and
repair solar energy equipment.
Uganda
Development of National Biomass Strategy;
supported technology for sustainable charcoal
production.
Zambia
Sustainable biomass use through forest
regeneration.
A solar centre established at Zambia University for
learning and ensuring quality; installed solar system in
13 health facilities in Lusaka Province and the central
Medical Store benefiting 85,000 people.
Partnership with four private
companies.
Zimbabwe
Biogas digester for schools Renewable energy and data analysis tools
Pilot project for solar systems for schools (Nyatsato
Primary School)
Gwanda solar plant with support from GEF and EU
Stakeholders’ consultations on
renewable energy
Note: APAUS is the Agency for the Promotion of Universal Access to Services in Mauritania. GEF is Global Environment Facility. EU is European Union.
+UNDP’s engagement in Madagascar is more on hydropower plant, e.g. in Amberivery that served two communities that benefitted 213 households. It also supported the development
of payment for environmental services scheme. It is also focusing on a hydropower project in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And in Cabo Verde, the focus is on energy efficiency. 
25
References
Africa-EU Renewable Energy Cooperation Programme (RECP) (n.d.). Ghana: Renewable
Energy Potential. Available from www.africa-eu-renewables.org/market-information/ghana/
renewable-energy-potential
African Progress Panel (2017). Lights, power, action: Electrifying Africa. Available from www.
africaprogresspanel.org/policy-papers/lights-power-action-electrifying-africa
BP (2016a). BP Statistical Review of World Energy. Available from https://www.bp.com/en/
global/corporate/energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy/downloads.html
BP (2016b). Solar energy: Solar energy is scaling up rapidly with capacity more than treble
over the past four years. Available from www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/energy-economics/
statistical-review-of-world-energy/renewable-energy/solar-energy.html
Federal Government of Nigeria (FGN) (2016). Sustainable Energy for All Action Agenda (SE4ALLAA).
Approved by the National Council on Power. First edition, July 2016.
International Energy Agency (IEA) (2017). Energy Access Outlook 2017 - From poverty to
prosperity. World Energy Outlook Special Report.
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST) (2015). Ghana has potential to
produce 110MW power with biomass. Available from https://goo.gl/thbLQc
ODI (Overseas Development Institute) (2016). Accelerating access to electricity in Africa with
off-grid solar: The impact of solar household solutions, by Kat Harrison, Andrew Scott and Ryan
Hogarth. Available from www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinionfiles/10229.pdf
Radebe, Jeff (2018). Media Statement by the Minister of Energy on the Independent Power
Producer Programmes, South Africa, 8 March 2018.
Rijkdienst voor Ondernemend Nederland (VRO) (2016). Business opportunities for renewable
energy in Ghana. March 2016.
Tiyou, Tony (2016), “The five biggest wind energy markets in Africa: Renewable Transformation
Challenge of Renewable Energy Focus http://www.renewableenergyfocus.com/view/44926/
the-five-biggest-wind-energy-markets-in-africa/
UNDP (2017). Sparking Sustainable Development: Mini-Grids as a Tool for Energy Access. Bureau
of Policy and Programme Support. UNDP, New York. Unpublished.
UNDP (2018), UNDP Africa Regional Bureau for Africa’s Country Offices’ Case Studies.
UNDP Country Office Case studies from Chad, Ghana, Madagascar, Nigeria and Zimbabwe on
UNDP’s Contribution to Renewable Energy Access in Africa. Unpublished.
UNDP (2018b). Progress of UNDP-GEF Portfolio in GEF-6 Funding Cycle (2014-2018) in Africa.
Bureau of Policy and Programme Support. UNDP, New York.
World Bank (2016). Global Solar atlas. Available from http://globalsolaratlas.info
World Bank (2017). State of electricity report 2017. Available from https://goo.gl/kWZy1u 

Regional Bureau for Africa
